---
layout: post
title: Mathematical Finance - Unit 5 Multi Period Market Model
subtitle: 金融数学（三）多期市场模型
category: money
tags: [ECON5020]
---
  
# Unit 5 Multi Period Market Model 
多期市场模型  

Overview
- One-period models
  - Elementary market model
  - Single-period market model
- Multi-period market model
  - Role of Information
  - Can we 'split' into many single-period models?  

Elementary Market Model
- 2 states of nature
- 2 assets: riskless bank account (governemnt bond) and an 'underlying asset' - risky share
- The aim is to replicate particular contingent claim: form a portfolio of two assets which will give you exactly the same payoff as the contingent claim.
- Important notions are introduced
  - arbitrage
  - risk neutral probability measure (RNPM)
- We show that the replicating strategy (portfolio weights) is fully explained by RNPM
- In the elementary model there is a simple formula to compute RNPM.
- If there is no arbitrage you can *always* find RNPM and construct replicating strategy.
  - I you can guess this is because there are two states of nature and two assets  

  Single-Period Market Model
- \\(K \geq 2\\) states of nature. We work with finite K. 
- \\(N \geq 2\\) risky assets and one riskless bank account (governemnt bond). So *N + 1* securities in portfolio.
- The aim is the same: replicate particular contingent claim by forming a portfolio of assets which will give you exactly the same payoff as the contingent claim. Important notions are introduced.
  - arbitrage
  - risk neutral probability measure (RNPM)
  - complete market model
  - attainable claim  

- FATP: Model \\(\cal M\\) is arbitrage free \\((\Leftrightarrow)\\)at least one RNPM exists.
  - Need a procedure to find RNPM. If we can construct a RNPM then there is no arbitrage. We discussed the procedure.
  - If we know RNPM we can use it to construct the replicating strategy.
  - If we have a replicating strategy then the contingent claim is attainable.
- Complete market: all contingent claims are attainable.
- Need to have at least as many (different) securities (*N + 1*) as (different) states of nature (*K*).
- So, we are naturally interested in working with complete markets. There is a unique RNPM there. And we learned how to construct a replicating portfolio and so we learned how to find an arbitrage price of a contingent claim.
- However, when markets are incomplete, then certain claims can still be attainable.  

 Multi-Period Market Model
- Many (possibly infinite number of) periods.
- \\(K \geq 2\\) states of nature.
- \\(N \geq 2\\) risky assets and one riskless bank account (governemnt bond). So *N + 1* securities in portfolio.
- Unlike in single-period models, information at each period changes.
- We discussed ho to model the information set (partitions and filtrations). When computing expectations at period t they are now conditional on 'information available at time *t*', not 'the whole information'.  

Outline
We will examine the following issues:  
1 Trading Strategies and Arbitrage-Free Models  
2 Risk-Neutral Probability Measures and Martingales  
3 Fundamental Theorem of Asset Pricing  
4 Arbitrage Pricing of Attainable Claims  
5 Risk-Neutral Valuation of Non-Attainable Claims  
6 Completeness of Multi-Period Market Models  


Primary Traded Assets
To specify a **multi-period market model** \\(\cal M= (B, S^1, . . . , S^n)\\)
we have to examine the concept of a dynamic trading strategy and the associated wealth process.
We first define **primary traded assets**  
- Let *r* be the interest rate. The **money market account** is denoted by \\(B_t\\) for t = 0, 1,... ,T where  

$$
B_t = (1 + r )^t  
$$
- There are n risky assets, called **stocks**, with price processes denoted
by \\(S_t^j\\) for t = 0, 1,...,T.
- We are given a probability space \\((\Omega,\cal F,\mathbb P)\\) endowed with a filtration \\(\mathbb F\\) generated by price processes of stocks.  


Dynamic Trading Strategy and Wealth Process  

A dynamic **trading strategy** in a multi-period market model is defined as a stochastic process \\((\phi_t =\phi_t^0,\phi_t^1,...,\phi_t^n)\\) for t = 0, 1, . . . ,*T* where:
- \\(\phi_t^0\\) is the number of 'shares' of the money market account *B* held at time *t*.
- \\(\phi_t^j\\)is the number of shares of the *j*th stock held at time *t*.  

Definition (Value Process)
The **wealth process** (or **value process**) of a trading strategy \\((\phi =\phi^0,\phi^1,...,\phi^n)\\) is the stochastic process \\(V (\phi)\\) given by  

$$  
V_t (\phi) = \phi_t^0 B_t + \Sigma _{j=1}^n \phi_t^j S_t^j .
$$

Self-Financing Trading Strategy  

Definition (Self-Financing Trading Strategy)  

A trading strategy \\(\phi\\) is said to be **self-financing strategy** if for t = 0, 1, . . . ,*T - 1*,  
$$
\phi_t^0 B_{t+1} + \Sigma_{j=1}^n S_{t+1}^j = \phi_{t+1}^0 B_{t+1} + \Sigma_{j=1}^j S_{t+1}^j
$$
- The LHS of (1) represents the value of the portfolio at time t + 1 before its revision, whereas the RHS represents the value at time t + 1 after the portfolio was revised.
- Condition (1) says that these two values must be equal and this means that no cash was withdrawn or added.
- For t = T - 1, both sides of (1) represent the wealth at time T, that is,\\(V_T(\phi)\\). We do not revise the portfolio at time T.  

Gains Process
Lemma (6.1)
For any self-financing trading strategy, the wealth process can be alternatively computed by, for t = 1, . . . ,T,   
 
$$
V_t (\phi) = \phi_t^0 B_t + \Sigma_{j=1}^n \phi_{t-1}^j S_t^j  
$$
Proof.
The statement is an immediate consequence of formula (1).
Definition (Gains Process)
For a trading strategy \\(\phi\\), the **gains process** \\(G(\phi) = (G_t (\phi))_{0 \leq t \leq T}\\) is given by  

$$
G_t (\phi) := (V_t (\phi)) - V_0(\phi).
$$

Multi-Period Market Model
Definition (Market Model)
A multi-period market model \\(\cal M= (B, S^1, . . . , S^n)\\) is given by the following data:  
1. A probability space \\((\Omega,\cal F,\mathbb P)\\) endowed with a filtration
\\(\mathbb F= (\cal F_t)_{0 \leq t \leq T}\\) .
2. The money market account B given by \\(B_t = (1 + r )^t\\) .
3. A number of financial assets with prices \\(S^1, . . . , S^n\\), which are assumed to be \\(\mathbb F\\)-adapted stochastic processes.
4. The class F of all self-financing trading strategies. 

Increment Processes
- As in the single-period model, we define the discounted value process, gains process and discounted gains process.
- It will be convenient to use the increment processes for traded assets.  

Definition (Increment Processes)
- The **increment process** \\(\Delta S^j\\) corresponding to the jth stock is deined by  

$$
\Delta S_{t+1}^j := S_{t+1}^j - S_t^j for t = 0, . . . ,T - 1  
$$  

- The **increment proces**s \\(\Delta B\\) of the money market account are given by  

$$
\Delta B_{t+1} := B_{t+1} - B_t = (1 + r )^t r = B_t r for t = 0, . . . ,T - 1.  
$$  

Discounted Processes
Definition (Discounted Processes)
The discounted stock prices are given by  

$$ 
\hat S_t^j:= \frac {S_t^j}{B_t}  
$$
and the increments of discounted prices are \\(\Delta \hat S_{t+1}^j := \hat S_t^j\\). The discounted wealth process \\(\hat V (\phi)\\) of \\(\phi\\) is given by  
$$
\hat V_t (\phi) :=\frac {V_t(\phi)}{B_t}  
$$  

The discounted gains process \\(\hat G (\phi)\\) of \\(\phi\\) equals  

$$
\hat G_t (\phi) := \hat V_t (\phi) - \hat V_0(\phi).  
$$
  

Discounted Processes
Proposition (6.1)
An \\(\mathbb F\\)-adapted trading strategy \\(phi = (\phi_t)_{0 \leq t \leq T} \\ is self-financing if and only if any of the two equivalent statements hold:
1. for every t = 1, . . . ,T  

$$
G_t (\phi) =\Sigma_{u=0}^{t-1} \phi_u^0 \delta G_{u+1} + \Sigma_{u=0}^{t-1} \Sigma_{j=1}^n \phi_u^j \Delta \hat S_{u+1}^j  
$$

2. for every t = 1, . . . ,T  

$$
\hat G_t (\phi) =\Sigma_{u=0}^{t-1} \Sigma_{j=1}^n \phi_u^j \Delta \hat S_{u+1}^j  
$$  

Properties of Discounted Gains and Wealth
Proof.
[Proof of Proposition 6.1] The proof is elementary and thus it is left as an exercise.
- Note that the process \\(\hat G (\phi)\\) given by condition 2) does not depend on
the component \\(\phi^0\\) of \\(\phi \in \Phi\\).
- In view of Proposition 6.1, the discounted wealth process of any \\(\phi \in \Phi\\) satifies  

$$
\hat V_t(\phi)=\hat V_0(\phi) + \Sigma_{u=0}^{t-1} \Sigma_{j=1}^n \phi_u^j \Delta \hat S_{u+1}^j  
$$

- Hence for every t = 0, . . . ,T - 1  

$$
\Delta \hat V_{t+1}(\phi)= \Delta \hat G_{t+1}(\phi) =\Sigma_{j=1}^n \phi_t^j \Delta \hat S_{t+1}^j
$$

Arbitrage Opportunity
As usual, we work under the standing assumption that the sample space \\(\Omega\\) is finite (or countable).
Definition (Arbitrage Opportunity)
A trading strategy \\(\phi = (\phi_t)_{0 \leq t \leq T} \\) is an **arbitrage opportunity** if
1. \\(V_0(\phi) = 0\\),
2. \\(V_T (\phi)(\omega) \geq\ 0 \\) for all \\(\omega \in \Omega\\),
3. \\(V_T (\phi)(w) > 0 \\) for some \\(\omega \in \Omega\\\) or, equivalently, \\(\mathbb E_P(V_T (\phi)) > 0\\).  
We say that a multi-period market model \\(\cal M\\) is arbitrage-free if no arbitrage opportunities exist in \\(\Phi\\).


Arbitrage Conditions
- Note that in the arbitrage conditions one can use either the discounted wealth process \\(\hat V\\) or the discounted gains process \\(\hat G\\) (instead of the wealth V).
- It is also important to note that conditions 1)-3) hold under \\(\mathbb P\\)
whenever they are satisfied under some probability measure \\(\mathbb Q\\) - equivalent to \\(\mathbb P\\).
- The next step is to introduce the concept of a risk-neutral probability measure for a multi-period market model.
- Risk-neutral probability measures are very closely related to the question of arbitrage-free property and completeness of a multi-period market model.

Risk-Neutral Probability Measure  
Definition (Risk-Neutral Probability Measure)  
A probability measure \\(\mathbb Q\\) on W is called a **risk-neutral probability
measure** for a multi-period market model \\(\cal M= (B, S^1, . . . , S^n)\\) whenever  
1.  \\(\mathbb Q(\omega) > 0 \\) for all \\(\omega \in \Omega\\),  
2.  \\(\mathbb E_P(\Delta \hat S_{t+1}^j) \| \cal F_t ) = 0\\) for all j = 1, . . . , n and t = 0, . . . ,T - 1.  

We denote by M the class of all risk-neutral probability measures for the market model \\(\cal M\\).  
Observe that condition 2) is equivalent to the equality, for all  

$$
(\mathbb E_P(\Delta \hat S_{t+1}^j) \| \cal F_t ) = \hat S_{t}^j
$$
The discounted stock price \\(\hat S^j\\) is a martingale under any risk-neutral probability measure \\(\mathbb Q \in \mathbb M\\).


Discounted Wealth as a Martingale  
Proposition (6.2)  
Let \\(\phi \in \Phi\\) be a trading strategy. Then the discounted wealth process \\(\hat V(\phi)\\) and the discounted gains process \\(\hat G(\phi)\\) are martingales under any risk-neutral probability measure \\(\mathbb Q \in \mathbb M\\).

Proof.  
- Recall that \\(\hat V_t(\phi)\\) = \\(\hat V_0(\phi)\\) + \\(\hat G_t(\phi)\\  for every t = 0, . . . ,T,
- Since \\(\hat V_0(\phi)\\) (the initial endowment) is a constant, it suffices to show that the process \\(\hat G_t(\phi)\\  is a martingale under any  
\\(\mathbb Q \in \mathbb M\\). From Proposition 6.1, we obtain  

$$
\hat G_{t+1}(\phi) = \hat G_t (\phi)+ \Sigma_{j=1}^n \phi_u^j \Delta \hat S_{u+1}^j  
$$


<script type="text/javascript" id="MathJax-script" async
  src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-svg.js">
</script>